[SYCL][Doc] Cluster Group Extension Document (#13594)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group.asciidoc

applications, convolutions, GEMMs and FFTs to name a few.

This proposal introduces a SYCL equivalent of the same, to be called as
`cluster_group`, and adds the methods to launch a kernel with a cluster range
and accessing the various id's associated with the cluster
launch in device code.

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_CUDA_CLUSTER_GROUP` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine
if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the
macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not version-ed, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Launching a kernel with a `cluster_group`

Because of the special scheduling guarantees associated with a cluster launch,
the backend must know which kernel would be using this feature. This can be

> thought of as a runtime property of the kernel.This proposal defines a new

Author: Removed the phrase - "can be thought of as a runtime property"

----

The property list can the be constructed as follows - 

[source,c++]
----
properties  cluster_launch_property{ClusterRange(1, 2, 1)};
----

Note that the total number of work-groups in the kernel should be a multiple of
the cluster range in each dimension.

The launch functions introduced in `sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions` can then
be used to launch the kernel with the mentioned properties.

=== Accessing the Cluster Group From Device Code

Building upon the group hierarchy in sycl, this proposal adds another level
above `group`(for work-groups), to be called as `cluster-group`, which 
represents a collection of work-groups and will be accessible via the `nd_item`
class, via a method to be introduced called `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_group()`.

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===

|`cluster_group<Dimensions> nd_item::ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_group()`
|Returns the constituent `cluster_group` in the kernel, representing this
`cluster_group`'s overall position in the `nd_range`
|===

The `cluster_group` class will contain the following member functions, to access
the various ids of the work-item and work-groups.

[source,c++]
----

>     class cluster_group {

Author: Templating on Dimensions now

    public:
        using id_type = id<3>;
        using range_type = range<3>;

>         using linear_id_type = uint32_t;

Author: changed it to size_t now

        id_type get_group_id() const;
    }
----

[%header,cols="5,5"]
|===
|Method
|Description

|`linear_id get_group_linear_id() const`
|Returns the flattened id of the calling `group` within the cluster

|`linear_id get_local_linear_id() const`
|Returns the flattened index of the calling work-item within the cluster

|`range_type get_cluster_group_range() const`
|Returns the number of work-groups in each dimension

|`id_type get_group_id() const`
|Returns the id of the calling work-group along each dimension
|===

To obtain the total number of clusters in the kernel, and to obtain the 
id of the cluster of the calling work-item, this extension proposes to add two
new member functions the `nd_item` class, namely 
`ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_range` and `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_id`

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===

|`range<3> nd_item::ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_range(size_t) const`
|Returns the total number of `cluster_groups` across each dimension.

|`id<3> nd_item::get_cluster_id() const`
|Returns the id of the cluster along each dimension.
|===

To synchronize all the work-groups in a cluster, this extension proposes to 

> overload the `sycl::group_barrier` function, accepting the `cluster_group` type

Author: Thanks for catching this, corrected the wording and also added a memory scope to go along with it

= sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group

:source-highlighter: coderay 
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]
:endnote: &#8212;{nbsp}end{nbsp}note

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks] 

Copyright (C) 2024-2024 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks of
The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

Other company and product names may be trademarks of the respective companies
with which they are associated and can be claimed as the property of others.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

> == Dependencies

Reviewer: Before this section we should have a "Contributors" section which lists everyone who has contributed to the extension.

Author: Added the contributors section

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 8 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision. 

This extensions also depends on the following other sycl extensions: 

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions.asciidoc[
          sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions]
* link:../experimental/sycl/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
    sycl_ext_oneapi_properties
]

== Status

This is an experimental extension specification for the `ext_oneapi_cuda`
backend, intended to provide early access to features and gather community
feedback.  
Interfaces defined in this specification are implemented in {dpcpp}, but they
are not finalized and may change incompatibly in future versions of {dpcpp}
without prior notice. *Shipping software products should not rely on APIs
defined in this specification.*

=== Backend support status 

> This extension is only supported by the `ext_oneapi_cuda` backend.

Reviewer: We should have this say the extension is not implemented, and then update this once the implementation PR has been merged, just to avoid this being incorrect due to PR merge order.

Author: Fixed

== Glossary

* Compute Capability: Abbreviated as "cc", a number assigned to each generation
of NVIDIA's GPUs conveying the feature set associated with that number.

== Overview

NVIDIA’s compute capability (cc) 9.0 devices introduced a new level in the
thread hierarchy, called as thread block clusters, in CUDA terminology. A thread
block cluster, is a collection of thread blocks (a work-group in SYCL

> terminology). The work-groups which make up a cluster have the ability to access

Reviewer: We should also mention here that an Nvidia thread block cluster represents a number of thread blocks which can execute concurrently.

Author: Added, 
It now says - 

> NVIDIA’s compute capability (cc) 9.0 devices introduced a new level in the
thread hierarchy, called as thread block clusters, in CUDA terminology. A thread
block cluster, is a collection of thread blocks (a work-group in SYCL
terminology) that run concurrently

each other's local memory, and can be synchronized. This has various
applications, convolutions, GEMMs and FFTs to name a few.

> This proposal introduces a SYCL equivalent of the same, to be called as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces a SYCL API to expose this capability, to be called as
```

`cluster_group`, and adds the methods to launch a kernel with a cluster range
and accessing the various id's associated with the cluster
launch in device code.

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_CUDA_CLUSTER_GROUP` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine
if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the
macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not version-ed, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Launching a kernel with a `cluster_group`

Because of the special scheduling guarantees associated with a cluster launch,
the backend must know which kernel would be using this feature. Thus, this 
proposal introduces a new launch property called as `cluster_size` that will

> contain the cluster  in terms of number of workgroups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contain the cluster in terms of number of work-groups.
```

 

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::cuda {
/**
* Dim Dimensionality of the launch
* size sycl::range specifying the number of workgroups in the cluster
  in each dimension.
*/
template <int Dim>
struct cluster_size {
  cluster_size(const sycl::range<Dim>& size) : 
    size(size) {}

>   size_t operator[](int i) { return size[i]; }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  size_t operator[](int i)
```
We don't need a definition, just the declaration.

Author: Fixed, 
though I have changed this query, instead of returning the cluster size for a particular dimension, it now returns the sycl::range itself

  sycl::range<Dim> size;
};
using cluster_size_key = cluster_size;
} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::cuda
----

The property list can the be constructed as follows - 

[source,c++]
----
properties  cluster_launch_property{cluster_size({1, 2, 1})};
----

Note that the total number of work-groups in the kernel must be a multiple of
the cluster range in each dimension.

The launch functions introduced in `sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions` can then
be used to launch the kernel with the mentioned property.

=== Accessing the Cluster Group From Device Code

Building upon the group hierarchy in sycl, this proposal adds another level
above `group`(for work-groups), to be called as `cluster-group`, which 
represents a collection of work-groups and will be accessible via the `nd_item`
class, via a method to be introduced called `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_group()`.

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===

|`cluster_group<Dimensions> nd_item::ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_group()`
|Returns the constituent `cluster_group` in the kernel, representing this

> `cluster_group`'s overall position in the `nd_range`

Reviewer 2: This table renders slightly strangely
![image](https://github.com/intel/llvm/assets/2334151/ea825517-4896-42b5-beff-8841b2241976)

Might want this as the column headers in bold, also the monospace isn't quite right.
```
|Method
|Description

```

This should also be added to a couple other tables in this doc.

|===

The `cluster_group` class will contain the following member functions, to access
the various ids of the work-item and work-groups.

[source,c++]
----
    class cluster_group {
    public:
        using id_type = id<3>;
        using range_type = range<3>;
        using linear_id_type = size_t;

        linear_id_type get_group_linear_id() const;

        linear_id_type get_local_linear_id() const;

        range_type get_cluster_group_range() const;

        id_type get_group_id() const;
    }
----

[%header,cols="5,5"]
|===
|Method
|Description

|`linear_id get_group_linear_id() const`

> |Returns the flattened id of the calling `group` within the cluster

Reviewer: I think we should say `linearized` instead of `flattened`.

Author: Fixed

|`linear_id get_local_linear_id() const`
|Returns the flattened index of the calling work-item within the cluster

|`range_type get_cluster_group_range() const`
|Returns the number of work-groups in each dimension

|`id_type get_group_id() const`
|Returns the id of the calling work-group along each dimension
|===

> 

Reviewer: I think we should also have the following member functions:

* `get_local_id`
* `get_local_range`
* `get_local_linear_range`
* `get_group_linear_range`

following the convention of [sycl_ext_oneapi_non_uniform_groups](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_non_uniform_groups.asciidoc).

Author: Similar to non uniform groups, should we also add a `leader` ?

Author: Addressed, and added a leader method as well, similar to every other group

Reviewer: Great thanks, yeah good catch, we should have a `leader` member function as well.

To obtain the total number of clusters in the kernel, and to obtain the 
id of the cluster of the calling work-item, this extension proposes to add two
new member functions the `nd_item` class, namely 

> `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_size` and `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_id`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ext_oneapi_cuda_get_size` and `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_id`.
```

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===

> |`range<3> nd_item::ext_oneapi_cuda_get_size(size_t) const`

Reviewer: I think we probably don't need member functions to return the size and id since we have `get_cluster_group`.

Author: `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_size` is now `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_range`, it somehow got named as ` ext_oneapi_cuda_get_size`. 

This is to get the total number of clusters in the kernel. similar to `nd_item::get_group_range`.

|Returns the total number of `cluster_groups` across each dimension.

|`id<3> nd_item::get_cluster_id() const`
|Returns the id of the cluster along each dimension.
|===

== Accessing another work-group's local memory

Work-group's within the cluster have the ability to access another work-group's 
local memory. Typically addresses which reside in the local memory of a 
work-group can only be addressed by the work-items of that work-group. 
Therefore, to access another work-group's local memory, the address needs to be
mapped such that the address in another work-group is addressable within the 
calling work-item. Further, to access another another work-group's local memory,
all the work-groups within the cluster must exist and the work-group's should
not cease to exist before all the memory operations are completed. This can be 
ensured by synchronizing all the work-items within the cluster before and after

> the local memory operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the local memory operations, using `group_barrier`.
```

A member function of the `cluster_group` class; 
`map_cluster_local_pointer` will perform the mapping and return a pointer 
which can then be dereferenced by the calling work-item. 

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===

|T*  map_cluster_local_pointer(T* addr, size_t group_id)
|Accepts the equivalent address to the memory location relative to the calling 
work-item which is to be mapped from the local memory of the work-group, as 

> specified by the group_id, denoting the flattened group_id within the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specified by the group_id, denoting the linear group_id within the cluster
```

|===

== Cluster Memory Fence Scope and Barrier

Work-items in a work-group can atomically operate on the local memory addresses
of another work-group which have mapped as described above. To facilitate this,
this proposal introduces a new memory scope, 
`sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_fence` which can be used with the
existing `atomic_ref` class.

[source,c++]
----
    class cluster_group {
    public:
    ...

>     static constexpr memory_scope fence_scope = 

Reviewer: It looks like `memory_scope::sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_fence` is used but there's no definition, we should define a new member of the `memory_scope` enum class:

```
enum class memory_scope {
...
sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_group,
...
};

inline constexpr auto sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_memory_scope_cluster_group
  = memory_scope::sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_group;
```

And then can we define the value of `fence_scope` in the `cluster_group` class to this enum value.

`cluster_group`, and adds the methods to launch a kernel with a cluster range
and accessing the various id's associated with the cluster
launch in device code.

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_CUDA_CLUSTER_GROUP` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine
if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the
macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not version-ed, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Launching a kernel with a `cluster_group`

Because of the special scheduling guarantees associated with a cluster launch,
the backend must know which kernel would be using this feature. Thus, this 
proposal introduces a new launch property called as `cluster_size` that will
contain the cluster in terms of number of work-groups.
 

> === Extension to `enum class aspect`

Reviewer 3: From here to 
```
A device requires the `sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group` aspect to
support launching a kernel with the property defined in the following section.
```

needs to be moved before the section "Launching a kernel with a `cluster_group`"

At the moment the aspect description is stuck in the middle of "Launching a kernel with a `cluster_group`"

Author: Done

for which `get_local_linear_id` return 0.
|===

== Accessing another work-group's local memory

Work-groups within the cluster have the ability to access another work-group's 
local memory. Typically addresses which reside in the local memory of a 
work-group can only be accessed by the work-items of that work-group. 
Therefore, to access another work-group's local memory, the address needs to be
mapped such that the address in another work-group is accessible within the 
calling work-item. Further, to access another another work-group's local memory,
all the work-groups within the cluster must exist and the work-groups should
not cease to exist before all the memory operations are completed. This can be 
ensured by synchronizing all the work-items within the cluster before and after
the local memory operations, using `group_barrier`.

A member function of the `cluster_group` class; 
`map_cluster_local_pointer` will perform the mapping and return a pointer 
which can then be dereferenced by the calling work-item. 

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===
|Method
|Description

|T*  map_cluster_local_pointer(T* addr, size_t group_id)

> |Accepts the equivalent address to the memory location relative to the calling 

Reviewer 4: It doesn't say anything about address space. I assume this means general SYCL rules apply both in/out pointer are generic address space? And therefore this will map to `__nvvm_mapa`?
Cutlass calls `mapa.shared::cluster` (https://github.com/NVIDIA/cutlass/blob/56b46e2d13875b46b8f6a03f9f5ac91e2bfdc01a/include/cute/arch/cluster_sm90.hpp#L169). Would it be recommended to directly call `__nvvm_mapa_shared_cluster` instead of `map_cluster_local_pointer` for best performance. 
Why do we have this function at all and don't just let users directly call the built-in. Seems like this function is anyhow a very low level function.

Author: Hi Roland, thanks for your feedback.

You raise a valid point, and this  should be differentiating interfaces accepting generic address space and shared address space (read decorated), and accepting multi_ptr would be a good way to do that.

Yes, this function will practically be  just a wrapper around `__nvvm_mapa*`, as it's interface was designed in a bottom up fashion so to speak, by checking what PTX requires and thus what we need to pass from the top level.

But I would still advocate against relying (or rather suggesting ) on the users to inline asm or use compiler intrinsics, as it would not be a very SYCL way of doing things, and would add lead to complexity in the user's code.

Reviewer 4: I agree it is nicer to have a proper SYCL interface. But for these kind of low level functions the advantage is small and therefore we should only do it if it doesn't come at a performance impact. In case you plan to add the version with shared address space in a later version, I would prefer if you wait to add the whole function in that later version. Because I think it is better to recommend to use users inline asm or intrinsics over incurring a performance impact.

Reviewer: This raises a really good point, I've been discussing this with @Naghasan and we came up with some ideas for how to address this.

For the current interface, where we are simply using raw pointers, these would be in the generic address space, so this would map to a `mapa` instruction. We think this could be optimised to `mapa.shared::cluster` either by the LLVM NVPTX backend or perhaps in the PTX assembler, this would require some investigation, but without these optimizations we agree this would not be as efficient as calling the PTX instruction directly in asm. This would keep things simple, though it would be hiding the fact that a generic pointer may be to local memory and that may point to different local address spaces, which are CUDA-specific.

As @AD2605 mentioned we have considered having a `multi_ptr` interface as well and this may be a way to represent this. We could add an additional address space, though this would be a big change to introduce for this feature. The other thing to consider here is that LLVM currently only has one local memory address space so it cannot distinguish between `.shared::cta` and `.shared::cluster`, so again it would rely on the NVPTX backend to lower this correctly, perhaps inferring the correct address space through the explicit use of `mapa.shared::cluster`.

I think we tend to agree with @rolandschulz's conclusion that perhaps we are trying to expose a CUDA API which is too low level to abstract in SYCL without expanding the SYCL memory model. Another option we have considered, which we wanted to explore more in the future was whether it would be better to rather than exposing the low-level API for mapping local memory between work-groups in a cluster-group, we instead provide group algorithms for the `cluster_group` for all the existing algorithms. The mapping of local memory between work-groups in a cluster-group would then become an implementation detail of these algorithms. I think this would also address @Pennycook's concern above about having functions which appear like group functions but don't follow the same semantics, i.e. are not cooperative.

Our initial goal was to try to align with CUDA here, but perhaps in this case it's better to have a more high-level abstraction. We could still have a SYCLcompat interface which provides a more low-level mapping of the CUDA APIs, though there's always a concern there that this would miss out on some potential optimisation opportunities.

We would like to close this PR soon so we can have this in for the 2025.0 release, so I would propose that we keep the current interface, clarify that the pointers will be assumed to be in the generic address space, and add a known issue that we'd like to continue to explore the design space for this. Alternatively we could remove these APIs in the current version entirely if there are concerns with having it in it's current form.

Author: @rolandschulz ,  I have added this in the known issues section here - [824af1e](https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/824af1e30203f42612a8c13bbe4740c91aeb1a2f)

= sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group

> :source-highlighter: coderay 

Reviewer: Comment.

> :source-highlighter: coderay 

Reviewer: Comment.

:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks] 

Copyright (C) 2024-2024 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks of
The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

Other company and product names may be trademarks of the respective companies
with which they are associated and can be claimed as the property of others.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Contributors
Atharva Dubey, Codeplay +
Gordon Brown, Codeplay 

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 8 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision. 

This extensions also depends on the following other sycl extensions: 

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions.asciidoc[
          sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions]
* link:../experimental/sycl/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
    sycl_ext_oneapi_properties
]

== Status

> This is an experimental extension specification for the `ext_oneapi_cuda`

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

backend, intended to provide early access to features and gather community
feedback.  
Interfaces defined in this specification are implemented in {dpcpp}, but they
are not finalized and may change incompatibly in future versions of {dpcpp}
without prior notice. *Shipping software products should not rely on APIs
defined in this specification.*

=== Backend support status 

> This extension has not been implemented.

Reviewer: Makes sense, I've removed this, see https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

== Glossary

* Compute Capability: Abbreviated as "cc", a number assigned to each generation
of NVIDIA's GPUs conveying the feature set associated with that number.

== Overview

NVIDIA’s compute capability (cc) 9.0 devices introduced a new level in the
thread hierarchy, called as thread block clusters, in CUDA terminology. A thread
block cluster, is a collection of thread blocks (a work-group in SYCL
terminology) that run concurrently. The work-groups which make up a cluster 
have the ability to access one another's local memory, and can be synchronized. 
This has various applications, convolutions, GEMMs and FFTs to name a few.

This proposal introduces a SYCL API to expose this capability, to be called as
`cluster_group`, and adds the methods to launch a kernel with a cluster range

> and accessing the various id's associated with the cluster

Author: Fixed in [beabf](https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/beabfadeeb7161fb5c5cbc8c69e9cfb9ad5bc888), though  this section has changed considerably

launch in device code.

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_CUDA_CLUSTER_GROUP` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine
if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the
macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not version-ed, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Extension to `enum class aspect`

[source]
----
namespace sycl {
enum class aspect {
  ...

>   sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group
```

}
}
----

> A device requires the `sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group` aspect to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A device requires the `ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group` aspect to
```

Author: Fixed in [beabf](https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/beabfadeeb7161fb5c5cbc8c69e9cfb9ad5bc888)

> support launching a kernel with the property defined in the following section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
support launching a kernel with the `cluster_size` property defined in the following section.
```

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

=== Launching a kernel with a `cluster_group`

Because of the special scheduling guarantees associated with a cluster launch,
the backend must know which kernel would be using this feature. Thus, this 
proposal introduces a new launch property called as `cluster_size` that will

> contain the cluster in terms of number of work-groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contain the cluster size in described in a number of work-groups.
```

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

 
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::cuda {
/**
* Dim Dimensionality of the launch
* size sycl::range specifying the number of workgroups in the cluster
  in each dimension.
*/
template <int Dim>
struct cluster_size {
  cluster_size(const sycl::range<Dim>& size) : 
    size(size) {}
  sycl::range<Dim> get_cluster_size();

>   sycl::range<Dim> size;

Reviewer: We only need to specify the interface so we don't need to define the member var.

Author: Fixed in [beabf](https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/beabfadeeb7161fb5c5cbc8c69e9cfb9ad5bc888)

};
using cluster_size_key = cluster_size;
} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::cuda
----

The property list can the be constructed as follows - 

[source,c++]
----
properties  cluster_launch_property{cluster_size({1, 2, 1})};
----

Note that the total number of work-groups in the kernel must be a multiple of

> the cluster range in each dimension.

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

The launch functions introduced in `sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions` can then

> be used to launch the kernel with the mentioned property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be used to launch the kernel with the `cluster_size` property.
```

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

=== Querying Maximum Cluster Size
To query the maximum supported cluster size, this proposal adds a new device
query, `max_cluster_group_size`, which returns the maximum possible number of 
work-groups present inside the cluster.

[source, c++]
----

> size_t max_cluster_size = 

Reviewer: We should add a definition for the info descriptor.

Author: Added in [beabf](https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/beabfadeeb7161fb5c5cbc8c69e9cfb9ad5bc888)

Though @AerialMantis , should this be in the info::device namespace as well ?

>       device.get_info<info::device::ext_cuda_experimental_max_cluster_group_size>();

Reviewer 5: Should this be:
```suggestion
      device.get_info<info::device::ext_oneapi_cuda_experimental_max_cluster_group_size>();
```

>       device.get_info<info::device::ext_oneapi_cuda_experimental_max_cluster_group_size>();

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

----

=== Accessing the Cluster Group From Device Code

> Building upon the group hierarchy in sycl, this proposal adds another level

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Building upon the group hierarchy in SYCL, this proposal adds another level
```

above `group`(for work-groups), to be called as `cluster-group`, which 
represents a collection of work-groups and will be accessible via the `nd_item`

> class, via a method to be introduced called `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_group()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class, via a member function to be introduced called `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_group()`.
```

Author: Fixed in [beabf](https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/beabfadeeb7161fb5c5cbc8c69e9cfb9ad5bc888)

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===
|Method
|Description

|`cluster_group<Dim> nd_item::ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_group()`
|Returns the constituent `cluster_group` in the kernel, representing this

> `cluster_group` 's overall position in the `nd_range`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`cluster_group`'s overall position in the `nd_range`
```

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

|===

The `cluster_group` class will contain the following member functions, to access
the various ids of the work-item and work-groups.

[source,c++]
----
    template<int Dim>
    class cluster_group {
    public:
        using id_type = id<Dim>;
        using range_type = range<Dim>;
        using linear_id_type = size_t;

        linear_id_type get_group_linear_id() const;

        linear_id_type get_local_linear_id() const;

        range_type get_group_range() const;

        id_type get_group_id() const;

        id_type get_local_id() const;

        range_type get_local_range() const;

        linear_id_type get_local_linear_range() const;

        linear_id_type get_group_linear_range() const;

        bool leader() const;
    }
----

[%header,cols="5,5"]
|===
|Method
|Description

|`linear_id get_group_linear_id() const`

> |Returns the linearized id of the calling `group` within the cluster

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

|Returns the id of calling work-item along each dimension within the cluster

|`range_type get_local_range() const`;
|Returns the number of work-items along each dimension within the cluster.

|`linear_id_type get_local_linear_range() const`;
|Returns a linearized version of the `range_type` returned by  `get_local_range`

|`linear_id_type get_group_linear_range() const`;
|Returns a linearized version of the `range_type` returned by  `get_group_range`

|`bool leader() const`;
|Returns true for exactly one work-item in the cluster, if the calling work-item
is the leader of the cluster group. The leader is guaranteed to be the work-item
for which `get_local_linear_id` return 0.
|===

To obtain the total number of clusters in the nd_range, and to obtain the 
id of the cluster of the calling work-item, this extension proposes to add two
new member functions the `nd_item` class, namely 
`ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_range` and `ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_id`.

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===
|Method
|Description

|`range<Dim> nd_item::ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_range() const`
|Returns the total number of clusters across each dimension.

|`id<Dim> nd_item::get_cluster_id() const`

> |Returns the id of the cluster along each dimension.

Reviewer: I agree, I've removed these, see https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

|===

== Accessing another work-group's local memory

> Work-group's within the cluster have the ability to access another work-group's 

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

local memory. Typically addresses which reside in the local memory of a 

> work-group can only be addressed by the work-items of that work-group. 

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

Therefore, to access another work-group's local memory, the address needs to be

> mapped such that the address in another work-group is addressable within the 

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

calling work-item. Further, to access another another work-group's local memory,

> all the work-groups within the cluster must exist and the work-group's should

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

not cease to exist before all the memory operations are completed. This can be 
ensured by synchronizing all the work-items within the cluster before and after
the local memory operations, using `group_barrier`.

A member function of the `cluster_group` class; 
`map_cluster_local_pointer` will perform the mapping and return a pointer 
which can then be dereferenced by the calling work-item. 

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===
|Method
|Description

> |T*  map_cluster_local_pointer(T* addr, size_t group_id)

Reviewer: We've started moving towards a convention of having free functions rather than member functions, so I think we should make this a free function which takes a `cluster_group` as a parameter.

Reviewer: We should also add an overload which takes a `local_ptr`.

Reviewer: I don't think we've specified a convention for this, but in recent features or extensions we have started opting for free functions over member functions, I'm thinking the the group functions/algorithms and enqueue functions. So I was suggesting we continue this pattern.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure if this should be a member or a free function yet, but I want to point out that we should be careful.

Currently, every function in SYCL with a signature like `sycl::foo(Group g, ...)` is a cooperative operation that implies the function calls synchronize with one another.  Mapping a pointer isn't a cooperative operation, but a signature like `sycl::map_cluster_local_pointer(Group cluster, T* addr, size_t group_id)` would strongly imply that it was. If we did opt for a free function, I think we'd need to at least move the group argument, something like `sycl::map_cluster_local_pointer(T* addr, Group cluster, size_t group_id)`.

|Accepts the equivalent address to the memory location relative to the calling 
work-item which is to be mapped from the local memory of the work-group, as 
specified by the group_id, denoting the linear group_id within the cluster
|===

> 

Reviewer: We should also add a function in this extension which maps to `query_shared_rank`.

Author: Added in [beabf](https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/beabfadeeb7161fb5c5cbc8c69e9cfb9ad5bc888)

== Cluster Memory Fence Scope and Barrier

Work-items in a work-group can atomically operate on the local memory addresses

> of another work-group which have mapped as described above. To facilitate this,

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

this proposal introduces a new memory scope, 

> `sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_fence` which can be used with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_fence` which can be used with the
```

Author: Fixed

> existing `atomic_ref` class.

Reviewer 6: The `memory_scope` enumeration can be used with other APIs too.  I assume `memory_scope::ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group` can be used with any of them?  If so, it's a bit confusing to list only `atomic_ref` here.  For example, maybe say something like:

> Work-items in a work-group can atomically operate on and synchronize with local memory addresses of another work-group which have been mapped as described above. To facilitate this, this proposal introduces a new memory scope which indicates a memory ordering constraint that applies to all work-items in the same cluster.

If you feel you need more clarity, you could add another sentence at the end:

> This memory scope can be used with `atomic_ref` and other SYCL APIs that use `memory_scope`.

Reviewer: Thanks for the suggestion, I've updated it to use this wording, see https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

[source, c++]
----
  enum class memory_scope {
  ...

>   sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_group,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group,
```

Reviewer: This has been fixed.

  ...
  };

  inline constexpr auto sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_memory_scope_cluster_group

>   = memory_scope::sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_group;

Reviewer: Good catch, I've fixed this in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.

Though I was wondering what our convention is for using "experimental" is this only for namespaces or do we also use it in member names as well? For example should this be `ext_oneapi_cuda_cluster_group` or `ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_group`?

>   = memory_scope::sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_group;

Reviewer 6: Only for the namespace.  We decided it was too wordy when used in function prefixes.

----

[source,c++]
----

>     class cluster_group {

Reviewer: We should move this to the earlier synopsis.

Author: Sorry, I did not get where to this exactly, could you please highlight it ?

Reviewer: I think this is fine now.

    public:
    ...
    static constexpr memory_scope fence_scope = 

>                 memory_scope::sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_fence;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
                memory_scope::sycl_ext_oneapi_experimental_cuda_cluster_group;
```

Also there seems to be some confusion about the ordering of the namespaces here.  Sometimes you have these expanded as "oneapi_experimental_cuda" and sometimes they're expanded as "oneapi_cuda_experimental".  Which is right?

Reviewer: So I'm not entirely sure which ordering is correct here, I've seen both used before, my instinct is that `oneapi_cuda_experimental` makes more sense, @gmlueck do we have a convention for one or the other?

    }
----

> To synchronize all workitems in the cluster group, `sycl::group_barrier` can be 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To coordinate all work-items in the cluster group, `sycl::group_barrier` can be 
```

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/bf131725ad90260b2496948fc5b1d6ab0c80d372.

used, accepting the `cluster_group` class.

== Example

This section adds a representative example of how to launch a kernel with 
the cluster-range specified and accessing various id's within the kernel - 

[source,c++]
----
void kernel_function_foo(nd_item<3> it) {
    using namespace sycl::
    auto cg = it.ext_oneapi_cuda_get_cluster_group();
    auto wg_ids_in_cluster = cg.get_group_id();
    ...
}

sycl::event launch_kernel_with_cluster() {
    using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental;

>     using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::cuda;

Reviewer: Fixed in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/13594/commits/3c722c023be09c2cce817a2aaab65f01f01c45c2.
